Relays are electromechanical devices that can be used as switches to control the flow of electrical current. They consist of a coil of wire (the control wire) that, when energized, creates a magnetic field that pulls an armature or a set of contacts. The contacts can then be used to open or close an electrical circuit, allowing current to flow or preventing it from flowing.

This circuit can then connect to other circuits, or to something like a motor, which might increment a count on a gear, like in Hollerith's tabulating machine. Relays were commonly used in early computers like the Harvard Mark I because they could perform logic operations such as AND, OR, and NOT. By combining these operations, complex computations could be performed.

In addition to being used in early computers, relays were widely used in industrial and control systems, where they provided a cost-effective mean of controlling high-power electrical loads. For example, relays could be used to switch on and off motors, lights, or other devices in response to signals from sensors or switches.

However, relays have several limitations compared to modern electronic switches. First, they are relatively slow; a good relay in the 40s might be able to flick back and forth fifty times in a second. Mark I was able to do 3 additions or subtractions per second, multiplications took 6 seconds, and divisions could take up to 15 seconds. More complex operations, like a trigonometric function, could take over a minute.

In addition to slow switching speed, another limitation was wear and tear. Anything mechanical that moves wear over time. So, as the number of relays increases, the probability of a failure increases too. The Harvard Mark I had 3500 relays. Even if a relay had a lifetime of 10 years, this would mean that you would have to replace, on average, a relay every day!

Moreover, these huge, warm machines also attracted insects. In September 1947, operators on the Harvard Mark II pulled a dead moth from a malfunctioning relay. Grace Hopper then noted:

> From then on, when anything went wrong with a computer, we said it had bugs in it.

Finally, relays also require a significant amount of power to operate, take up more space, and are more expensive than electronic components. As a result, they were replaced by a faster, more reliable alternative, the vacuum tube.